Despite undoubted spatial structure in our data, we did not incorporate spatial autocorrelation into our models of species richness. This is because of the aim of our analyses: to describe associations between different forms of environmental heterogeneity and species richness such as to reveal which axes of heterogeneity are similarly associated with richness in both the GCFR and SWAFR. This contrasts with, for example, efforts to predict species richness in absolute, or to partition sources of its variation. The species richness of a given area can be attributable to (i) the mean environmental conditions, (ii) the variety of environmental conditions within the area (i.e. the environmental heterogeneity), (iii) the broader, non-environmental, underlying spatial pattern of species richness and (iv) the richness of the regional species pool. Our goal here is to explore not the size of the portion of richness variation attributable to heterogeneity, but, within that portion, what forms of heterogeneity constitute that portion. In doing so, we aim to assess which forms of heterogeneity are similarly associated with species richness in both the GCFR and SWAFR. When dealing with spatial structure in datasets destined for analysis using statistical models, accounting for that structure allows for more proper estimation of the sizes of portions (i), (ii) and (iii) (due to the obvious inclusion of (iii)). We, however, as previously stated, are not trying to estimate the sizes of these portions. As such, we believe accounting for spatial autocorrelation in our dataset to not only not necessary, but would lead to estimation of "non-significant" effects of the forms of heterogeneity we have here. This would prevent us from describing all potential similarities (or differences) between the GCFR and SWAFR in terms of the forms of heterogeneity potentially importantly associated with species richness.