<!-- From draft-01:Introduction -->

Biodiversity represents the variety of species and the ecological and evolutionary processes that bring about those species (Bøhn & Amundsen, 2004). Studying the distribution of biodiversity in space is a major avenue of biological research (Kerr et al., 2001; Kreft & Jetz, 2007). Region-scale geographic patterns in species richness have long been studied, particularly in biodiversity hotspots (Cook et al., 2015). Indeed, “primary geographic patterns” such as these (sensu Juarez-Barrera et al., 2018) are arguably central when studing the distribution of biota across space. The spatial distribution of species richness can be and often is explained in terms of the physical environment. Certain properties of the environment have been suggested to influence species richness in three ways: (i) available resources and energy, which can determine the number of species able to co-exist in an area (Gaston, 2000; Kreft & Jetz, 2007; Mouchet et al., 2015); (ii) environmental stability through time, which enables species’ persistence; and (iii) spatial heterogeneity, which can both stimulate ecological speciation and possible barriers to gene flow and can facilitate greater levels of species’ co-existence (Thuiller et al., 2006; Mouchet et al., 2015; Cramer & Verboom, 2016). The physical environment, then, can be used to explain species richness in both a local-deterministic and historical sense (Ricklefs, 1987).

The maintenance of species richness, particularly the coexistence of high numbers of species in biodiversity hotspots, is often regarded as “paradoxical” (Hart et al., 2017), and is a central problem in macro-ecology and biogeography (Ricklefs, 1987; Kreft & Jetz, 2007; Hart et al., 2017). Species richness is constrained by the ability of habitats to support a variety of species—its ecological carrying capacity (Mateo et al., 2017). This is exemplified in modelling approches, wherein species richness is a function of environmental predictors in a correlative framework (“macro-ecological models”; Mateo et al., 2017). Macro-ecological models of species richness implicitly assume that communities are saturated, following species-area and species-energy relationships, and at equilibrium with the environment (Mateo et al., 2017).

A solution to the “paradox” of species co-existence is environmental heterogeneity (EH): a more heterogeneous environment exhibits a larger environmental space, thus facilitating co-existence between more species. Heterogeneity in the physical environment is known to be positively associated with species richness (Rensburg et al., 2002; Hart et al., 2017), and has been demonstrated to do so across many taxa—e.g. Canadian butterflies (Kerr et al., 2001), European vertebrates (Mouchet et al., 2015), South African birds (Rensburg et al., 2002), in communities along marine continental margins (Levin et al., 2010), French scarab beetles (Lobo et al., 2004), and for global terrestrial plants (Kreft & Jetz, 2007). The spatial scale of heterogeneity, or “grain” of the environment, is also important to consider (Hart et al., 2017), as spatial scale in absolute environmental conditions has also been explored (Kerr et al., 2001; Baudena et al., 2015; Mouchet et al., 2015). Species co-existence and biodiversity maintenance is indeed suggested to be scale-dependent (Hart et al., 2017).

EH is often under-represented in macro-ecological models of species richness, and has recently been found to explain up to ca. 95% of biome level species richness across South Africa (Cramer & Verboom, 2016). Indeed, models that include EH yield better estimates of the richness of the Cape flora (Thuiller et al., 2006; Cramer & Verboom, 2016). Mediterranean-type terrestrial biodiversity hotspots, such as the Cape flora included in the models by Cramer & Verboom (2016), present interesting study systems in which to investigate the relationship between the environment and species richness. These systems exhibit far greater species richness than predicted by their areas, productivities and latitudes (Cowling et al., 1996; Kreft & Jetz, 2007). There are five Mediterranean biodiversity hotspots on Earth: the California Floristic Province, the Mediterranean Basin, the Chilean Winter Rainfall-Valdivian Forests, the Greater Cape Floristic Region, and the Southwest Australia Floristic Region (Cowling et al., 1996; Hopper & Gioia, 2004; Cook et al., 2015). These ecosystems have regular fire-cycles (Cowling et al., 1996), climatic buffering, and long term stability (Kreft & Jetz, 2007), shrubby, sclerophyllous flora (Hopper & Gioia, 2004). Together, they account for ca. 20% of global vascular plant species, yet only ca. 5% of global land surface areas (Cowling et al., 1996). Various hypotheses have been proposed to explain the high levels of plant species richness in these regions (Cook et al., 2015). The species accumulation hypothesis states that the stability of these regions has allowed many species to accrue. The species co-existence hypothesis states that these hotspots may facilitate greater degrees of species co-existence in smaller spatial areas, due to fine-scale heterogeneity in their environments. Indeed, EH has evolutionary implications too, stimulating ecological speciation across sharp environmental gradients.

<!-- From draft-01:Discussion -->

Cook et al. (2015) summarised the suites of hypotheses for the high levels of plant diversity in mediterranean-type ecosystems. Broadly, these biodiversity hotspots are thought to arise due to greater levels of evolutionary diversification, ecological co-existence and time for species accumulation by either immigration or in situ evolution. Our study concerns the dual role of EH in facilitating ecological speciation along environmental gradients and a diversity of habitats in wich greater numbers of species may co-exist. We have correlative evidence for these processes, in that EH was positively associated with high levels of species richness and turnover in both regions. Further research should be aimed at distinguishing the roles of ecological speciation and species co-existence associated with EH in mediterranean-type ecosystems. The role of environmental stability is relevant here (Cook et al., 2015, Pinto-Ledezma et al., 2018), both by allowing more continuous species accumulation when habitats persists through geologic time and by allowing environmental gradients to be stable long enough for ecological speciation to occur (Pinto-Ledezma et al., 2018). In the contexts of the Cape and SWA, this long term environmental stability, and the stability of EH through time, is indeed expected to contribute to these regions biodiversity (Hopper, 1979; Cowling et al., 1996).
Ed: I’d like to include more information on the landscape/geologic history of the regions here, and link this to the notion of environmental stability and “species accumulation”, sensu Cook et al. (2015) and Pinto-Ledezma et al. (2018).

The Cape region has been found previously to have the second highest median topographic heterogeneity of the five Mediterranean-climate regions (Bradshaw & Cowling, 2014). In the models developed by Cramer & Verboom (2016) for South Africa, roughness in topography was largely superseded as an important predictor of species richness by other roughness variables. This is the case with our results too, likely as topographic complexity can be considered a proxy for gradients in other environmental axes, such as rainfall or temperature. In line with our hypotheses, a combination of absolute and heterogeneity variables are associated with species richness and turnover. These effects are region-specific, particularly in that patterns in the Cape are more strongly determined by edaphic conditions and EH while SWA patterns are more strongly determined by absolute environmetal conditions, particularly climate. Kreft & Jetz (2007) modelled global terrestrial vascular plant species richness, which focussed primarily on using absolute environmental variables, underestimated the richness of the Cape flora. Though Kreft & Jetz (2007) did include topographic heterogeneity in their predictor set, topography is often a proxy for more biologically meaningful variables (Cramer & Verboom, 2016). This explains why the inclusion of these variables (e.g. roughness in mean annual precipitation) yields more accurate predictions of species richness. Indeed, Thuiller et al. (2006) also included topographic heterogeneity.

We also detected strongly non-linear relationships between environmental and heterogeneity variables and species richness and turnover. We expected this, as non-linear relationships are common in ecology (Zanne et al. 2018), making our use of machine-learning methods appropriate here.

Comparing our models to those fit by Cramer & Verboom (2016), we did not directly find spatial heterogeneity in NDVI to be an important determinant of species richness and turnover patterns in the Cape. Rather absolute MAP, which is collinear with absolute NDVI, was found to be important. This speaks to the relationship between vegetation productivity and climate, and how suitably productive habitats can foster more species . An additional interpretation of spatial heterogeneity (and indeed absolute conditions) in NDVI is that of changing canopy light-contexts (Cramer & Verboom, 2016). Power et al. (2017) found that floristic turnover between biomes in South Africa to be associated with differences in biomes’ leaf area indices. We found NDVI to be more heterogeneous across the Cape than SWA (Figures 1). NDVI is an integrating variable, which captures information about productivity, light availability, and soil nutrients (Power et al., 2017). Absolute NDVI and its correlates can be interpreted as contributing to predicting species richness in the Cape. This demonstrates the role of ecological productivity in facilitating the co-existence diverse species assemblages. EH, then, must be considered alongside resource- and energy-availability axes when intepreting the drivers of species richness. In so much as a diverse environmental space supports more species, the materials and productivity required for biota to thrive are also needed to support species (Gaston, 2000; Kerr et al., 2001; Bøhn & Amundsen, 2004; Kreft & Jetz, 2007). As such, our findings, along with those of previous studies (Rensburg et al., 2002; Thuiller et al., 2006; Kreft & Jetz, 2007; Cramer & Verboom, 2016), suggest that there are ecological and evolutionary consequence to both resource availability and EH.

We detected a strong set of links between various edaphic properties and vascular plant species richness and turnover in the Cape. The importance of absolute pH speaks to the association of many Cape communities with nutrient impoversished, acidic soils . We did not, however, find edaphic conditions to be as important as we expected in SWA. This may be due to a real lack of importance of edaphic features in driving assemblage patterns in SWA. ALternatively, there is a risk that the quality of soil data provided to our models, from SoilGrids250m , is insufficient for our purposes here. There are two potential reasons for this. Firstly, teh SoilGrids250m data product is acknowledged to be less accurate at the scales we investigate here , such that the true variation in soil properties in SWA is not represented in our dataset. Secondly, it could be that the link between soils and assemblage patterns in SWA exists, but simply at a finer scale than that at which we performed our analyses here. These two reasons are not mutually exclusive, in that SoilGrids250m may be both inaccurate at the scales we consider here and that our analysis considers scales greater than those important in SWA plant community assemblage patterns. This is particularly relevant to our study, as the Cape has a much wider range of scales exhibited in the heterogeneity across its environmental axes. Notably, each region has finer scale heterogeneity in some variables, and coarser scale in others—neither region is more fine or coarse than the other over all environmental axes.

Ed: I’d obviously like to include more information on the landscape/geologic history of the regions here too, and with reference to particular soil variables (Mike?).

Another issue related to spatial scales, as with any ecological study, is that of spatially uniform and representative plant species occurence data. Efforts were made herein to minimise differences in data-quality between SWA and Cape by using remote-sensing derived environmental data. Species occurence data, however, prove difficult to obtain with uniform methodology. South African biodiversity data is stored only to QDS-level accuracy. As such, our analyses were limited to that as the finest spatial scale, such that our environmental datasets necessarily, then, were also limited to the QDS-scale. This may complicate the interpretation of our analyses, as these data may be too coarse in scale to capture patterns of species richness and turnover and their associations with the environmenta in reality in empirically heterogeneous environments like the Cape and SWA.

In addition to the scale of our data, spatial bias in species occurence data must also be considered. GBIF data are sourced from both herbaria and plot-monitoring datasets. The relative contribution of each of these to GBIF data may vary between countries and regions—i.e. between the Cape and SWA. As recently noted by Guerin (2018), herbarium records and plot-based inventories describe regional flora with varying accuracy, especially with respect to documenting high levels of floristic turnover. We emphasise here our concerns that there the floral occurence data and soils information use in this study are especially at risk of spatial bias and/or inaccuracies.

...

Our findings here are correlative. There are, however, many proposed mechanisms to explain the correlative signals demonstrated here. Our findings support the hypothesis that mediterranean systems’ plant species richness is a function of spatial variability in environmental conditions. This can stimulate diversification, and maintain that diversity by providing a range of habitats for species co-existence. Oligtrophic soils can stimulate an increase in functional diversity, through the evolution of diverse nutrient acquisition strategies (Lambers et al., 2010; Verboom et al., 2017)—e.g. sclerophylly (Cramer et al., 2014; Cook et al., 2015). An aspect of the environment I have neglected to consider is fire, shown to also contribute to predictions here in the Cape (Cramer & Verboom, 2016). Cardillo (2012) have shown the structuring forces behind species co-occurrence patterns, and thus likely species richness,differ between species-pairs with different post-fire responses and those with similar post-fire responses.

Following from the understanding that functionally diverse assemblages, which are more likely to be more species rich, are likely to arise and/or occur in areas with diverse ecological pressures (Molina-Venegas et al., 2015), one would expect, then, heterogeneous habitats such as those in Mediterranean-type biodiversity hotspots to exhibit high levels functional beta diversity along steep environmental gradients (Molina-Venegas et al., 2015). If the niches concerning these functions are phylogenetically conserved among those biota, then one would also expect high levels of species and phylogenetic beta diversity along these gradients (Molina-Venegas et al., 2015). This concurs with the notion put forward by Power et al. (2017), wherein megadiverse systems such as these represent the results of “phylogenetic niche conservatism on a heterogeneous landscape”. Thus, species and phylogenetic turnover should covary with environmental heterogeneity in some way. Indeed, endemism, at certain scales, could also follow this pattern. Thuiller et al. (2006) demonstrated that there are phylogenetic and biome-related determinants of species richness. This makes sense in light of the low probability of lineages crossing biome boundaries in Mediterranean systems (Power et al., 2017). NDVI and light availability, and the heterogeneity therein, are associated with high levels of floristic turnover (Power et al., 2017). This may be indicative of ecological specialisation precluding species from crossing these boundaries, thus increasing the level of endemism within a region, while also increasing the level of turnover, and thus likely species richness, along environmental gradients. Although, this may be debated. Beard et al. (2000) state that the high levels of endemism in SWA are function of habitat specialisation to soil mosaics. Cf. Laliberte et al. (2014), who say that this endemism is likely due to environmental filtering along these soil turnover sequences, as opposed to the juxtaposition of specialised species along soil gradients.

Ed: Is it worth expanding this discussion to functional diversity and phylogenetic diversity metrics too?

Summarily, we have demonstrated support for the generality of EH as a meaningful predictor of patterns of species richness and turnover in mediterranean-type ecosystems. In SWA and the Cape, high levels of are also likely the results of long-term landscape and climatic stability (Hopper, 1979). Thus, the roles of environmental variability through space that persists through deep time are two important ways in which the environment relates to biodiversity in these regions. The efficacy of environmental stability through geological time should be explored further, comparing the Cape and SWA.
