<!-- From draft-01:Introduction -->

Biodiversity represents the variety of species and the ecological and evolutionary processes that bring about those species (Bøhn & Amundsen, 2004). Studying the distribution of biodiversity in space is a major avenue of biological research (Kerr et al., 2001; Kreft & Jetz, 2007). Region-scale geographic patterns in species richness have long been studied, particularly in biodiversity hotspots (Cook et al., 2015). Indeed, “primary geographic patterns” such as these (sensu Juarez-Barrera et al., 2018) are arguably central when studing the distribution of biota across space. 

The maintenance of species richness, particularly the coexistence of high numbers of species in biodiversity hotspots, is often regarded as “paradoxical” (Hart et al., 2017), and is a central problem in macro-ecology and biogeography (Ricklefs, 1987; Kreft & Jetz, 2007; Hart et al., 2017). Species richness is constrained by the ability of habitats to support a variety of species—its ecological carrying capacity (Mateo et al., 2017). This is exemplified in modelling approches, wherein species richness is a function of environmental predictors in a correlative framework (“macro-ecological models”; Mateo et al., 2017). Macro-ecological models of species richness implicitly assume that communities are saturated, following species-area and species-energy relationships, and at equilibrium with the environment (Mateo et al., 2017).

EH is often under-represented in macro-ecological models of species richness, and has recently been found to explain up to ca. 95% of biome level species richness across South Africa (Cramer & Verboom, 2016).

Mediterranean-type terrestrial biodiversity hotspots, such as the Cape flora included in the models by Cramer & Verboom (2016), present interesting study systems in which to investigate the relationship between the environment and species richness. These systems exhibit far greater species richness than predicted by their areas, productivities and latitudes (Cowling et al., 1996; Kreft & Jetz, 2007). There are five Mediterranean biodiversity hotspots on Earth: the California Floristic Province, the Mediterranean Basin, the Chilean Winter Rainfall-Valdivian Forests, the Greater Cape Floristic Region, and the Southwest Australia Floristic Region (Cowling et al., 1996; Hopper & Gioia, 2004; Cook et al., 2015). These ecosystems have regular fire-cycles (Cowling et al., 1996), climatic buffering, and long term stability (Kreft & Jetz, 2007), shrubby, sclerophyllous flora (Hopper & Gioia, 2004). Together, they account for ca. 20% of global vascular plant species, yet only ca. 5% of global land surface areas (Cowling et al., 1996). Various hypotheses have been proposed to explain the high levels of plant species richness in these regions (Cook et al., 2015). The species accumulation hypothesis states that the stability of these regions has allowed many species to accrue. The species co-existence hypothesis states that these hotspots may facilitate greater degrees of species co-existence in smaller spatial areas, due to fine-scale heterogeneity in their environments. Indeed, EH has evolutionary implications too, stimulating ecological speciation across sharp environmental gradients.

<!-- From draft-01:Discussion -->

Comparing our models to those fit by Cramer & Verboom (2016), we did not directly find spatial heterogeneity in NDVI to be an important determinant of species richness and turnover patterns in the Cape. Rather absolute MAP, which is collinear with absolute NDVI, was found to be important. This speaks to the relationship between vegetation productivity and climate, and how suitably productive habitats can foster more species . An additional interpretation of spatial heterogeneity (and indeed absolute conditions) in NDVI is that of changing canopy light-contexts (Cramer & Verboom, 2016). Power et al. (2017) found that floristic turnover between biomes in South Africa to be associated with differences in biomes’ leaf area indices. We found NDVI to be more heterogeneous across the Cape than SWA (Figures 1). NDVI is an integrating variable, which captures information about productivity, light availability, and soil nutrients (Power et al., 2017). Absolute NDVI and its correlates can be interpreted as contributing to predicting species richness in the Cape. This demonstrates the role of ecological productivity in facilitating the co-existence diverse species assemblages. EH, then, must be considered alongside resource- and energy-availability axes when intepreting the drivers of species richness. In so much as a diverse environmental space supports more species, the materials and productivity required for biota to thrive are also needed to support species (Gaston, 2000; Kerr et al., 2001; Bøhn & Amundsen, 2004; Kreft & Jetz, 2007). As such, our findings, along with those of previous studies (Rensburg et al., 2002; Thuiller et al., 2006; Kreft & Jetz, 2007; Cramer & Verboom, 2016), suggest that there are ecological and evolutionary consequence to both resource availability and EH.

We detected a strong set of links between various edaphic properties and vascular plant species richness and turnover in the Cape. The importance of absolute pH speaks to the association of many Cape communities with nutrient impoversished, acidic soils . We did not, however, find edaphic conditions to be as important as we expected in SWA. This may be due to a real lack of importance of edaphic features in driving assemblage patterns in SWA. ALternatively, there is a risk that the quality of soil data provided to our models, from SoilGrids250m , is insufficient for our purposes here. There are two potential reasons for this. Firstly, teh SoilGrids250m data product is acknowledged to be less accurate at the scales we investigate here , such that the true variation in soil properties in SWA is not represented in our dataset. Secondly, it could be that the link between soils and assemblage patterns in SWA exists, but simply at a finer scale than that at which we performed our analyses here. These two reasons are not mutually exclusive, in that SoilGrids250m may be both inaccurate at the scales we consider here and that our analysis considers scales greater than those important in SWA plant community assemblage patterns. This is particularly relevant to our study, as the Cape has a much wider range of scales exhibited in the heterogeneity across its environmental axes. Notably, each region has finer scale heterogeneity in some variables, and coarser scale in others—neither region is more fine or coarse than the other over all environmental axes.

Ed: I’d obviously like to include more information on the landscape/geologic history of the regions here too, and with reference to particular soil variables (Mike?).
